Merging gem5-SALAM code (#2429)
gem5/gem5: util/SALAM-docs/README_SALAM.md

# gem5-SALAM #

gem5-SALAM (System Architecture for LLVM-based Accelerator Modeling), is a novel system architecture designed to enable LLVM-based modeling and simulation of custom hardware accelerators.

# Requirements

- gem5 dependencies
- LLVM 11–20 (see `SUPPORTED_LLVM_VERSIONS` in `SConstruct`)
- Frontend LLVM compiler for preferred development language (eg. clang for C)
- ARM bare-metal cross-compiler (`gcc-arm-none-eabi`) to build SALAM benchmarks / host ELFs

# gem5-SALAM Setup

## All Required Dependencies for gem5-SALAM (Ubuntu 20.04)

```bash
sudo apt install build-essential git m4 scons zlib1g zlib1g-dev \
    libprotobuf-dev protobuf-compiler libprotoc-dev libgoogle-perftools-dev \
    python3-dev python-is-python3 libboost-all-dev pkg-config
```

## LLVM/Clang Setup

For a quick start, one can simply run the following to install LLVM and Clang on Ubuntu 20.04.
```bash

> sudo apt install llvm-12 llvm-12-tools clang-12

Reviewer: Same questions as above

- You can also add your own benchmarks. A detailed walkthrough is in **util/SALAM-docs/Building_and_Integrating_Accelerators.md**.

## Quickstart: build and run BFS

The BFS example under **configs/example/gem5_library/salam-benchmarks** shows how to interface with the gem5-SALAM simulation objects.

`run_system.sh` requires **M5_PATH** and **ACC_BENCH_PATH**. Point `ACC_BENCH_PATH` at the buildable **`src/`** tree (it has Makefiles). The sibling **`workloads/`** tree is a precompiled snapshot without Makefiles and is not the default path when `BUILD=True` (the script default). Invoke the script with `bash` (its shebang is not on the first line). Paths passed to `--bench-path` are relative to `ACC_BENCH_PATH`.

```bash
export M5_PATH=/path/to/gem5
export ACC_BENCH_PATH=$M5_PATH/configs/example/gem5_library/salam-benchmarks/src

cd $M5_PATH
scons build/ARM/gem5.opt --with-salam -j`nproc`

# Optional: build the workload yourself first
# cd $ACC_BENCH_PATH/bfs && make

> bash $M5_PATH/util/SALAM-tools/run_system.sh --bench bfs --bench-path bfs

Reviewer: Let me know if I'm wrong, but from what I can tell, the value of `--bench` can be arbitrary as long as `--bench-path` is set to the workload's directory under $ACC_BENCH_PATH (`bfs` in this case). It might be worth briefly clarifying accepted values for --bench and --bench-path in the sentence below.

**configs/example/gem5_library/salam-benchmarks/src/bfs/configs/hw_interface/**

* `instructions/inst_list.yml` — master instruction list (the generator updates functional-unit mappings here)
* `functional_units/40nm_model/5ns/default_profile/*/*.yml` — functional units read by **HWProfileGenerator**
* `functional_units/40nm_model/5ns/additional_units/float_trig_sine/` — example optional functional unit (see below)

### Adding a custom functional unit

The `float_trig_sine` YAML under `additional_units/` shows how to define an optional functional unit: alias, pipeline stages, cycles, `enum_value`, supported datatypes, instruction bindings, and a CACTI-style power model. **HWProfileGenerator** only processes YAML files under `default_profile/`. The `additional_units/` tree is not read automatically; it is included as a reference for how to structure custom units.

To include a custom unit when regenerating:

1. Copy the unit directory from `additional_units/` into `default_profile/` (for example, `default_profile/float_trig_sine/float_trig_sine.yml`).

> 2. Bind LLVM instructions to the unit in `inst_list.yml` (and update the workload **config.yml** `hw_config` section if per-kernel `runtime_cycles` change).

Reviewer: The line from `Building_and_Integrating_Accelerators.md` is more descriptive, so I suggest making them match (+ an additional detail):

```suggestion
2. Update `inst_list.yml` to map the relevant LLVM instructions' `functional_unit` field to the unit's `enum_value`, and adjust **config.yml** `hw_config` if per-kernel `runtime_cycles` change.
```

> 2. Bind LLVM instructions to the unit in `inst_list.yml` (and update the workload **config.yml** `hw_config` section if per-kernel `runtime_cycles` change).

Reviewer: You may also want to mention that the values of the `opcode_num` fields match with the values in `src/salam/InstOpCodes.py`, explain how to get this value for `float_trig_sine`, and show a completed code snippet of how to include `float_trig_sine`.

> 3. Run **HWProfileGenerator**, rebuild gem5 with `--with-salam`, and rerun the workload.

Reviewer: I tried to follow this sequence of steps to add `float_trig_sine`, but ran into build errors, likely due to making some incorrect assumptions about what needed to be done. Could you take a look at what I did, let me know what needs to be changed, and possibly modify the documentation if you think it's necessary/would be helpful to users?

Steps I took:

1. Copied `float_trig_sine/float_trig_sine.yml` into `default_profile`
2. In `inst_list.yml`, I added the following code snippet:
```bash
  sin:
    functional_unit: 17
    functional_unit_limit: 0
    opcode_num: 100    # I wasn't sure how to set this, so I chose arbitrarily
    runtime_cycles: 0
```
3. In `float_trig_sine.yml`, I added `sin` under `instructions`:
```txt
        instructions: # LLVM OpCode: Runtime Cycles
            - sin
```
4. Ran `python3 util/SALAM-tools/hw_generator/HWProfileGenerator.py -b bfs`
5. Tried rebuilding with `scons build/ARM/gem5.opt --with-salam -j 12`. However, I encountered a build error:
```bash
terminate called after throwing an instance of 'pybind11::error_already_set'                    
  what():  AttributeError: module 'm5.objects.InstConfig' has no attribute 'Fmuladd'            
                                                                                                
At:                                                                                             
  build_tools/sim_object_param_struct_cc.py(343): <module>    
```
In a different attempted build, I also encountered a similar build error that had `Fneg` instead of `Fmuladd`.

Can you let me know what I did incorrectly here?

Reviewer: I also tried re-binding the `fsub` instruction to use `float_trig_sine` by:

1. modifying config.yml and inst_list.yml to set `fsub`'s `functional_unit` field to `float_trig_sine`'s `enum_value` (17), and 
2. adding `fsub` as an instruction in `float_trig_sine.yml`. 

After running HWProfileGenerator.py, however, I noticed that the functional unit for `fsub` was reset to its original value (6) in `inst_list.yml`, and I got the following error when building:

```
In file included from build/ARM/params/HWInterface.hh:14,
                 from build/ARM/params/AccComputeUnit.hh:14,
                 from build/ARM/python/_m5/param_AccComputeUnit.cc:13:
build/ARM/params/FunctionalUnits.hh:22:10: fatal error: params/FloatTrigSine.hh: No such file or directory
   22 | #include "params/FloatTrigSine.hh"
      |          ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
compilation terminated.
 [SO Param] m5.objects.ArmSeWorkload, ArmEmuLinux -> ARM/params/ArmEmuLinux.hh
scons: *** [build/ARM/python/_m5/param_AccComputeUnit.o] Error 1
scons: building terminated because of errors.
```

> 3. Run **HWProfileGenerator**, rebuild gem5 with `--with-salam`, and rerun the workload.

Reviewer: Additional comments for this section:

1. I think it could be helpful to clarify where the values of `opcode_num` come from (`src/salam/InstOpCodes.py`?), and to explain how to get it for the instruction for the `float_trig_sine` example, assuming that making a new instruction is the right thing to do.
2. It could be helpful to include code snippets for what to add to various files for the `float_trig_sine` example.

### Regenerating from YAML

`--bench-path` is the workload directory under `ACC_BENCH_PATH` (defaults to the same name as `-b` / `--bench`). For in-tree BFS with `ACC_BENCH_PATH=.../salam-benchmarks/src`, that is `bfs` → `$ACC_BENCH_PATH/bfs`.

```bash
export M5_PATH=/path/to/gem5
export ACC_BENCH_PATH=$M5_PATH/configs/example/gem5_library/salam-benchmarks/src
python3 util/SALAM-tools/hw_generator/HWProfileGenerator.py -b bfs
```

Then rebuild gem5 (`scons build/ARM/gem5.opt --with-salam`) before running simulations.

_Note that the default checked-in SALAM hardware profile uses the floating-point functional unit mapping needed by the provided 32-bit ARM examples. Custom profiles should define their desired floating-point units and latencies in YAML before regenerating the hardware model. Future work may make floating-point functional unit selection more directly type-aware from the LLVM instruction precision._

> ## Power Modeling using cacti-SALAM

Reviewer: In either this section or the dependencies section at the start of this file, I'd add something about installing `g++-multilib` (in addition to `gcc-multilib`). Without it, the following `make` error occurs when running `setup_cacti_SALAM.py`:

```md
/usr/include/c++/13/cassert:43:10: fatal error: bits/c++config.h: No such file or directory                                                             
   43 | #include <bits/c++config.h>                                         
      |          ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~                                         
compilation terminated.                                                     
make[1]: *** [cacti.mk:46: obj_opt/area.o] Error 1
```

**cacti-SALAM** (`util/SALAM-tools/cacti-SALAM`) is an **offline helper** for running CACTI on accelerator YAML configs. It is **not wired into** gem5-SALAM simulation.

```bash
cd util/SALAM-tools/cacti-SALAM
./setup_cacti_SALAM.py
```

Create `$ACC_BENCH_PATH/benchmarks.list` with lines of the form:

```

> path/to/config.yml <benchmark name> <config name>

Reviewer: Here, it may also be worth clarifying accepted values for `<benchmark name>` and `<config name>`.

```

Then:

```bash
python3 ./run_cacti_SALAM.py --bench-list $ACC_BENCH_PATH/benchmarks.list --delay 1.0
```

Results are written to `util/SALAM-tools/cacti-SALAM/results/SALAM-out.csv`. To use those (or other) coefficients in a simulation power estimate, add code in **`LLVMInterface::printResults()`** in **src/salam/llvm_interface.cc**.

# Resources

## gem5 Documentation

https://www.gem5.org/documentation/

## gem5 Tutorial

The gem5 documentation has a [tutorial for working with gem5](http://learning.gem5.org/book/index.html#) that will help get you started with the basics of creating your own sim objects.

> 

Reviewer: Might also be good to point to the 2024 gem5 Bootcamp here: https://bootcamp.gem5.org/

## Building and Integrating Accelerators in gem5-SALAM

We have written a guide that walks through the in-tree BFS example. This will help you get started with creating your own benchmarks and systems. It can be viewed at **util/SALAM-docs/Building_and_Integrating_Accelerators.md**.

## SALAM Object Overview

The overview at **util/SALAM-docs/SALAM_Object_Overview.md** covers what various Sim Objects in gem5-SALAM are and their purpose.

## Full-system OS Simulation ##

Please download the latest version of the Linux Kernel for ARM from the [gem5 ARM kernel page](http://gem5.org/ARM_Kernel).

> You will also need the [ARM disk images](http://www.gem5.org/dist/current/arm/) for full system simulation.

Reviewer: Dead links, might be better to point to the gem5 Resources website: https://resources.gem5.org/

# gem5-SALAM #

gem5-SALAM (System Architecture for LLVM-based Accelerator Modeling), is a novel system architecture designed to enable LLVM-based modeling and simulation of custom hardware accelerators.

# Requirements

- gem5 dependencies
- LLVM-9 or newer
- Frontend LLVM compiler for preferred development language (eg. clang for C)

# gem5-SALAM Setup

> ## All Required Dependencies for gem5-SALAM (Ubuntu 20.04)

Reviewer: On your end, has the setup process been checked for newer versions of Ubuntu, or only on Ubuntu 20.04? Would you be able to update the documentation for newer versions of Ubuntu?

# Building gem5-SALAM

When building gem5-SALAM, there are multiple different binary types that can be created. Just like in gem5 the options are debug, opt, fast, prof, and perf. We recommend that users either use the opt or debug builds, as these are the build types we develop and test on.

Below are the bash commands you would use to build the opt or debug binary.

```bash
scons build/ARM/gem5.opt --with-salam -j`nproc`
```

```bash
scons build/ARM/gem5.debug --with-salam -j`nproc`
```

For more information regarding the binary types, and other build information refer to the gem5 build documentation [here](http://learning.gem5.org/book/part1/building.html).

# Building with docker
You can use the Dockerfile given in the `docker/` directory to build the project and run the benchmarks. To build the project use the following command:
```bash
docker build . --file docker/Dockerfile --build-arg BUILD_TYPE="opt"
```

The `BUILD_TYPE` argument sets the the building option for the project and can be `opt` or `debug`.

# Using gem5-SALAM

> To use gem5-SALAM you need to define the computation model of you accelerator in your language of choice,and compile it to LLVM IR. Any control and dataflow graph optimization (eg. loop unrolling) should be handled by the compiler. You can construct accelerators by associating their LLVM IR with an LLVMInterface and connecting it to the desired CommInterface in the gem5 memory map.

Reviewer 2: "choice,and compile" --> "choice, and compile"

Author: Fixed.

Author: I've added named constants for the default condition entry and the cycle-count field in the Switch condition vector in [src/salam/LLVMRead/instruction.hh](https://github.com/gem5/gem5/pull/2429/files/c974153e074f48d93e077c215280fc839374f800#diff-3fa8dbb723505efbedbc72008eaa06924db97fc8413f78a09507716365738690).

I've also changed the clear operations in [src/salam/comm_interface.cc](https://github.com/gem5/gem5/pull/2429/files/c974153e074f48d93e077c215280fc839374f800#diff-1de99a7a2a32371cb45be59420fcd68c44e6ecee01808fdf6fcb27920c9c67f5) to use separate named clear-mask constants matching the old 0xfe/0xfc values, instead of deriving the mask from MmrRun/MmrBusy, and replaced the remaining raw done bit check with MmrDone.
